+++
title = "PhD course by Francesco Cellarosi in Bologna"
date = "2022-04-03 16:00:00"
categories = ["news", "events"]
+++

Between April 11 and May 12, 2022, 
[Francesco Cellarosi](https://www.queensu.ca/mathstat/people/faculty/profiles/cellarosi) will deliver the 
PhD course "*Randomness in Number Theory: dynamical and probabilistic methods*", at the Department of
Mathematics of Università di Bologna and on-line via MS Teams.

### Schedule

(All times are **4-6pm** Italian time. Room name within the Math Building in parenthesis)

- April 11  (Seminario VIII Piano)
- April 13  (Vitali)
- April 20  (Bombelli)
- April 21  (Seminario VIII Piano)
- April 26  (Seminario VIII Piano)
- April 28  (Seminario VIII Piano)
- May 3  (Seminario VIII Piano)
- May 5  (Seminario VII Piano)
- May 10  (Bombelli)
- May 12  (Seminario VIII Piano)

### Program

The course will focus on recent advances concerning the study of random behaviour of number-theoretical 
sequences. We will mainly focus on the distribution of square-free integers and their generalisations 
(e.g. k-free, B-free). We will discuss Sarnak's conjecture on the disjointness of the Mobius function $\mu(n)$ 
from sequences generated by zero-entropy dynamical systems. We will prove that $\mu^2(n)$ (the indicator of 
square-free integers) is completely deterministic and study the statistics of its patterns in long intervals. 
We will also discuss some very recent progress on the distribution of square-free integers in small intervals.

Time permitting, we may discuss the limiting distribution of quadratic Weyl sums and their generalisations 
(e.g. classical Jacobi theta functions). Quadratic Weyl sums are a special kind of exponential sums that 
appear naturally in number theory, mathematical physics, and representation theory. They can be interpreted as 
deterministic walks (with a random 'seed') in the complex plane. Generalising Sarnak's equidistribution of 
horocycles under the action of the geodesic ow, we can study the limiting distribution of such Weyl sums. A 
stochastic process of number-theoretical origin can be defined using such sums. Understanding the behaviour of 
trajectories of the geodesic ow in a homogeneous space, we can study this process, that shares only some of 
its properties with those of the Brownian motion.

To attend the course **please register 
[here](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/12d_BxA1ghligbpo835z3vh_dJ8UM80hExdMgsY8cRY8/)**.
You will receive an email with all the information and material about the course, and your email will
be insterted in the course team on MS Teams.
